REL 1 UNIT | Term 1
General Notes

Nature of Task
Test
Date of Task
Week 8, 22nd March 2017
Period 2 (in your English period)
Weighting
30%

Outcomes to be Assessed:
A student
P1 describes the characteristics of religion and belief systems
P2 identifies the influence of religion and belief systems on individuals and society
P6 selects and uses relevant information about religion from a variety of sources
P8 uses appropriate terminology related to religion and belief systems.
----

Topic Glossary: 

Term / Concept
Definition
*Religion 
A set of beliefs which can explain the purpose, cause and nature of the universe.
Supernatural 
A force or being beyond scientific understanding and the laws of nature.
*Monotheism 
The belief and worship that there is only one God.
*Polytheism 
The belief and worship of more than one God.
*Pantheism 
The belief that God is the transcendent reality of which the material universe and human beings are only a manifestation of. 
*Transcendent 
Beyond the range of physical human experience. 
*Immanent
Forces and powers being embedded within nature who created the universe.
Semitic 
Denoting to a family of languages that include Hebrew, Arabic, and Aramaic which constitutes the main sub group of the Afro-Asiatic family.
*Kinship
The relationship between Aboriginal groups which share the same land and dialect.
Secularism 
The view that public education and other civil policies should be conducted without a religious element. 
*Humanism 
A belief system which focuses on human matters, rather than divine supernatural matters.
*Materialism 
Preoccupation with material objects and comforts as opposed to religious and spiritual beliefs.
*Buddhism 
Buddhism is the belief system that a human can wake up and see the world in the same way a God could, also the eightfold path.
Atheist 
A person who disbeliefs in the existence of God or Gods.
Agnostic 
Human knowledge being limited to experience. 
*Worldview
A system of answers shared by a significant amount of people. A religion’s perspective of the world. 
Aboriginal 
Related to the Aborigines.
Indigenous 
Originated from a particular native place.
Spirituality 
Quality of being spiritual and relating to you God or Gods.
*Dreaming
Manifested in the real world and celebrated as a ritual. 
*Dreamtime
An ancient time of the creation of all things by sacred ancestors, who’s spirits remain in the present.
Kinship 
Sharing characteristics of origins.
*Metatemporal
Relating to the past, present and future through a non-linear time cycle.  
Totemism 
Belief in kinship and a mystical relationship between a group or an individual or a totem.
Dispossession 
To put a person out of possession.
*Rite of passage
A ritual or ceremony initiating an individual into a religion.
Bat Mitzvah 
Rite of passage^ for a Jewish girl’s coming of age, or initiation.

The Nature of Religion: 

“Religion is essential to humans who have made sense of the world. Religion answers and reasons significant questions which always confront humans:” 

(1) Why does a person exist at all?
(2) Why is there an universe?
(3) What happens to a person once they die? 
(4) Why is there suffering in the world? 

A system of answers shared by a significant amount of people is also known as a worldview. Humans have realised that answers to these 4 questions above depend on powers and forces beyond their control. The powers and forces take the presence of a God or Gods or even humans themselves.   





The Transcendent worldview:

“This belief system believes in beings which are beyond the known universe that are not subject to the laws of nature.” – Semitic religions: [Christianity, Judaism, Islam]

Two main principles of transcendent religions:
(1) Monotheism 
(2) Polytheism 

Monotheistic & Transcendent



Christianity
Judaism
Islam

Polytheistic & Immanent



Buddhism 
Hinduism
Shintoism

The Immanent worldview:

“This belief system believes in forces and powers being embedded within nature and individuals. Believers worship and respect for the places in which the forces and powers or sprits dwell.” – [Buddhism] 
Important immanent ideologies:
(1) Natural spirits take the form of humans.
(2) Spirits are the force behind natural phenomena.
(3) Humans must oblige to live cooperatively with these forces of nature either wise live in misfortune. 

The Characteristics of a Religion: 

⎫ Beliefs and believers 
⎫ Sacred texts and writings 
⎫ Ethics
⎫ Rituals and ceremonies 
⎫ Contribution of religion


Beliefs and believers:

Beliefs are the focal point of all religions. They are based on different paradigms.
- Paradigms: Core belief a person must have to belong to a religion.  

Example of paradigms: 
¬ Buddhism has the paradigms of:
i.  Buddha’s eightfold path
ii. The four noble truths
¬ Christianity contains the belief of Jesus Christ is the son of God. Whom died then resurrected to become humanity’s saviour.
¬ Islam centralises on:
i.  Allah is the only incomparable God.
ii. Muhammad is the last messenger of God.
¬ Judaism is the acceptance that God has entered history and formed a covenant relationship with the people.
¬ Hinduism is the belief that the ultimate union with Brahman is the fundamental purpose and for humans.

Although all religions have a core paradigm, each religion contains separate beliefs which drift amid the paradigm. Since these separate beliefs vary amongst the believers significant divisions can occur within religious traditions.
These separate beliefs can be developed because:
¬ Reformation of religious tradition by removing: customs, laws and ideas that are no longer seen essential to the religion. Much like the protestant reformation. 
¬ Traditions and understanding may change within time, resulting in the alterations in religious traditions to adapt. 


Sacred texts and Writings:

Sacred texts and writings are a fundamental characteristic of a religion. They may be actual texts and writings or images.

The following sacred texts are revelations from God:
- Revelation: A manifestation of divine will or truth

Examples of sacred texts:
¬ Qur’an – Islam 
¬ The Bible – Christianity
¬ Torah – Judaism
The important stories contained within a sacred text are summarised to form a religious paradigm. This aids believers in understanding the essential teaching of the respective religious tradition. 

Sacred texts provide believers with the following: 
⎫ Core teachings 
⎫ Rules
⎫ Prayers
⎫ Ethical circumstances 



Ethics:

Outcomes to be Assessed:
¬ Outline the principal ethical teachings in:
⎫ The Ten Commandments
⎫ The Beatitudes
⎫ Jesus’ commandment of love
¬ Describe the importance of ethical teachings in the life of adherents.

“Ethics are the practical application of beliefs and teachings for believers”

Ethical teachings are most commonly found in religious scared texts. Ethics underline the behaviour of humans towards other humans. For most traditions afterlife is determined after a believers ethical life. 
Ethical teachings regulate human behaviour: 
¬ [P] – Politically 
¬ [E] – Economically 
¬ [S] – Sexually 
¬ [P] – Professionally 
¬ [E] – Environmentally 

The 10 Commandments:
1)  You shall have no other Gods before me.
2)  You shall not make idols.
3)  You shall not take the name of the LORD your God in vain.
4)  Remember the Sabbath day, keep it holy.
5)  Honour your father and your mother.
6)  You shall not murder.
7)  You shall not commit adultery.
8)  You shall not steal.
9)  You shall not bear false witness against your neighbour.
10) You shall not covet.

The 8 Beatitudes: 

Revolutionary mind map created by Jesus’ followers detailing how to live a good life.

1)  Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.  
2)  Blessed are they who mourn, for they shall be comforted.
3)  Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the Earth.
4)  Blessed are they who hunger and thirst for righteousness, for they shall be satisfied. 
5)  Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy. 
6)  Blessed are the pure of heart, for they shall see God.
7)  Blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be called Children of God. 
8)  Blessed are they who are persecuted for the sake of righteousness, for they are the kind.

Jesus’ Commandment of Love:

[Jesus] said to him, ‘ “You shall love the Lord your God with all your heart, and with all your soul, and with all your mind.” This is the greatest and first commandment. And a second is like it: “You shall love your neighbour as yourself.” On these two commandments hang all the law and the prophets.’ 
(Matthew 22:37–40)



Rituals and Ceremonies:

Rituals and ceremonies are ways in which believers celebrate and reinforce the beliefs of the respective religion. 
Public:
¬ Formal activity with distinguished structures, timing and content. 
¬ Based on sacred texts and writings of that religion. 
Private:
¬ Time and place where a believer can express themselves within their chosen religion. 



Contribution of Religion:

Contribution to individual 

¬ Provides an explanation of the creation of the universe, human nature and life’s purpose. 
¬ Provides an individual with an identity as a believer and sense of belonging to that religion along with solitude.
¬ Offers system of ethics in which will guide believers into the right way of living and behaving. 
¬ Religion also gives a believer the opportunity to celebrate significant events in their lives, such as a baptism or initiation ceremony.
¬ Presents believers with a way to achieve inner peace through prayer, reflection and meditation. 

Contribution to society

Maintaining peace and order – 
¬ Religion has provided humans with a system of ethics which provides principle teachings that acknowledge the responsibilities an individual has towards another divine human being.  
¬ Religion plays a big role in the unity of people and the prevention of anarchy.

Societies’ laws – 
¬ The system of ethics provided by religion has contributed to the standards of institutes such as hospitals, orphanages and welfare systems, which all help the less fortunate.

Education – 
¬ Religions strive in the education sector and are constantly seeking for development of higher forms of learning.  
¬ The presence of religion surrounds institutes such as the great universities in Europe, the Islamic world, India and Buddhist Asia. It has been through these institutes where science and medical knowledge have been preserved.   

Architecture – 
¬ Religious traditions have been a great influence on the artistic dimensions of the human. Some of the world’s wonders which where cultivate and constructed based on religious traditions:
i.  Angkor Wat
ii. The Taj Mahal
iii.  Chatters cathedral 
¬ The infrastructures are sacred places which have been artistically and architecturally recognised by those religious and atheist. 

Science and medicine –
¬ Religions aim to teach believers that they are more than what can be explained by science. They have insisted that human beings are divine beings capable of great acts of goodness and creativity. 


Aboriginal Beliefs and Spirituality of the Dreaming

Outcomes to be Assessed:
¬ Outline the nature of the Dreaming in relation to:
⎫ origins of the universe
⎫ sacred sites
⎫ stories of the Dreaming
⎫ symbolism and art 
¬ Discuss the diversity of the Dreaming for Aboriginal peoples.
¬ Recognise the importance of the Dreaming for the life of Aboriginal peoples.
¬ Investigate the inextricable connection of the Dreaming, the land and identity. 

The Dreaming: 
 
The dreaming holds the essence of aboriginal religions, explaining the Aboriginal view of creation. Living the past of their spirit ancestors that have passed down ceremonies and rituals by generation to generation.

Origins of the Universe:

For aboriginals, the Dreaming explains the:
¬ Origins of the universe
¬ The workings of nature
¬ Cycle of life and death


Sacred Sites:  

¬ Sacred sites are places which are associated with sacred ancestral beings. 
¬ Aboriginals define their identity based on these lands and sacred sites. 


Symbolism and art:
Aboriginal symbolism contains many layers of meaning, some of which are sacred. 
Layers depicted: 
1)  Obvious texture and aspects of respective art. 
2)  Visual symbols representing spiritual concepts and expressions to only those with experience. 


Rituals and Ceremonies:

Totems are part of the Aboriginal belief system. They are given to groups and individuals and represent an animal, water creature and sometimes even trees or rocks. Aboriginals were not allowed to hunt or kill their totem, as they were expected to preserve it, since it was responsible for their creation.
  
Aboriginals also celebrated and expressed themselves through their inherited oral traditions. Generally via words, music and dance. The traditions were handed down from the previous generation and play a principle role in the telling of Aboriginal mythology (The Dreaming).  
Diversity of Aboriginal spirituality and groups:

¬ Diversity in Aboriginal groups can be represented as their totems which are spiritually embodied as they’re creators.  
¬ There are about 900 different Aboriginal nations within Australia and since each group has its own Dreaming, stories differ in diversity greatly. 
¬ Each separate group has its own dialect by which they use to communicate with each other.
¬ Diversity can be represented through Aboriginal symbolism of art. Each painting represents something different with unique spiritual significances.  

Why are the Dreaming stories important to aboriginals?

¬ The Dreaming stories tell the beginning of all creation and of the life of all living things. This is one of the characteristics of a Religion, which is the contribution to the individual. Provides answers to life’s big questions.
¬ The Dreaming defines the unbreakable link between humans, ancestral beings and the spiritual world. 

What is the connection between Dreaming, land and identity?

¬ The link between the Dreaming, land and identity is made through the same link of human beings and creation: ‘Totemism’. A totem is the answer to one’s common question of “How did I get here?”. Totems are responsible for creation of an individual therefore should be preserved. 
¬ The Dreaming affects rights to land as areas can be sacred to certain number of different groups – places such as Uluru. 
¬ Aboriginals envision themselves as part of the land or the land as part of their identity. “I am the land”.
¬ Land is crucially important in Aboriginal culture, as it houses the totems of which belong to the Aboriginal group or individual. 

What is the connection between Dreaming and Totemism?

¬ Totemism isn’t a religion however it contains religious elements because of the link it makes between creation and the Ancestral beings. It beholds a relationship between the humans and the Ancestral beings.
¬ The Dreaming is an eternal link between Ancestral spirits and Aboriginal humanity. It reveals the totemic connection to land and the sacred sites symbolised by the Ancestral beings. 


Example of aboriginal stories from The Dreaming:

The rainbow serpent
The world was flat, bare and cold. The Rainbow Serpent slept under the ground with all the animal tribes in her belly waiting to be born. When it was time, she pushed up, calling to the animals to come from their sleep. She threw the land out, making mountains and hills and spilled water over the land, making rivers and lakes. She made the sun, the fire and all the colours. It forced passages through rocks and created more waterholes. 
The lightning brothers
The Lightning Brothers during their travels, the younger brother, Yabiringi, began lusting for Kanayanda, wife of his older brother, Yagjabula, which ended in a fight between the two brothers. The older brother decapitated the other with a swing from his special stone axe. The brothers live in the sky-world, the dwelling place of many ancestral spirits. The brothers are depicted in rock art and paintings.

